Chapter 2

The Assassin

‘You are sure you understand what to do?’ Jahangir looked hard at the Englishman standing before him. This was only his second meeting with Bartholomew Hawkins but it had been enough to convince him that he was well fitted to the role of assassin. Hawkins spoke a crude, halting Persian picked up while serving as a mercenary with the Shah of Persia’s army in Isfahan but enough for Jahangir to have been able to test him to his satisfaction.

‘I will give you five hundred gold mohurs now for your journey to Bengal and back. When Sher Afghan is dead, I’ll pay you another thousand mohurs.’

Bartholomew Hawkins nodded. His broad face, reddened by the sun, looked satisfied. Even though he was standing some ten feet away Jahangir could smell the man’s almost animal reek. Why didn’t these foreigners wash? More and more were arriving at his court at Agra. Englishmen like this one, Frenchmen, Italians, Portuguese and Spanish, and all of them, whether missionaries, merchants or mercenaries, seemed to stink. Perhaps it was the clothes they wore. Hawkins’s broad, sweating body was encased in a tight black leather jerkin, pantaloons that fastened with dark red ribbons just above the knee and dun-coloured woollen stockings. On his feet was a pair of scuffed riding boots.

‘You don’t mind how I kill him?’

‘No. All that matters is that he dies. If you merely injure him that’s no use to me.’

‘Once I get to Gaur, how will I find this Sher Afghan?’

‘He is the city’s governor and commands the garrison in the Gaur fort. Wait and watch and you will soon see him as he goes about his daily business. Any further questions?’

Hawkins hesitated a moment. ‘Will you give me a document – a letter with your seal perhaps – proving that I am in your service?’

‘No. Nothing must connect me with Sher Afghan’s death. I am paying you to use your ingenuity. You told me you had undertaken sensitive missions for the shah.’

The Englishman shrugged bulky shoulders. ‘Then I have nothing further to ask. I’ll leave tomorrow.’

When he was alone Jahangir walked slowly out on to the balcony of his private apartments overlooking the Jumna river. Would Bartholomew Hawkins succeed? He seemed tough enough and, unlike most of the other Europeans at court, could speak some Persian. But one of his main reasons for choosing him was that he was a foreigner. If he’d sent his own men, they might have talked, albeit only to a friend or relation, and news of what he was planning might have reached Sher Afghan, giving him time to flee. That would be less of a risk with Bartholomew Hawkins, who had no clan or family loyalties to anyone in Hindustan and owed no man anything. He hadn’t even asked why Jahangir wanted Sher Afghan dead. Such a lack of curiosity was an excellent thing . . .

Jahangir had told no one the purpose of his meetings with the English mercenary. He would have confided in Suleiman Beg but his milk-brother was dead from the spotted fever. He had died as together they had returned from a short campaign against some of Khusrau’s followers who had fled into the jungles southeast of Agra. Jahangir shuddered even now as he recalled Suleiman Beg’s last moments lying in a humid, airless tent while the monsoon rains beat down from leaden skies on its roof only twelve short hours after he had fallen ill. He had quickly become so delirious that he had not even recognised Jahangir. His lips, covered in a scum of white saliva, had stretched into a scream while his sweat-soaked body had twitched and convulsed beneath the thin sheet that covered it. Then he had been still, leaving Jahangir no chance to bid him goodbye or to tell him how important his wise and restraining words had been throughout his rebellion against his father or during the recent dark days of Khusrau’s revolt.

To lose the companion he had trusted above all others just when everything was going so well seemed especially hard. In the ten months since Suleiman Beg’s death there had been no further insurrections – not even the merest whiff of dissent. His empire was secure. The only threat had come from the belligerent ruler of Persia Shah Abbas who – if the reports brought by Abdul Rahman’s scouts were true – was scheming to retake Kandahar from the Moghuls. However, the strong army equipped with twenty bronze cannon and two hundred war elephants that Jahangir had at once despatched to the northwest had made the shah think again. His crimson-capped troops had withdrawn long before Jahangir’s forces were even within sight of Kandahar’s high mud-brick walls.

He still missed his milk-brother badly. Despite his wives and his remaining sons, his powers and his possessions, he felt alone – isolated even – in a way he had not while Suleiman Beg was alive. His boyhood had been filled with uncertainty, trying on the one hand to live up to the expectations of his father Akbar, a man who had never known failure, while on the other remaining loyal to his Rajput mother who had hated and despised Akbar as the barbarian subjugator of her people. Had it not been for his grandmother Hamida, always ready to listen to and encourage him, he would indeed have been lost. Suleiman Beg had been the only other person who had come anywhere close to occupying such a place in his life – a loyal and wise friend whose advice however unpalatable he had trusted among the self-serving counsel of his courtiers, vying for promotion and reward.

Only yesterday he had gone to inspect progress on the domed sandstone tomb he had ordered to be built for Suleiman Beg near the Agra fort. As he watched the labourers chisel away at the slabs of stone his loss had struck him anew, and he had spent the evening alone with his thoughts. Suleiman Beg’s death had reminded him as little else could have done of the transitoriness of life. No man however young or in however good health or good spirits knew the number of his days. Before death overtook him he must achieve all that he could but he must also enjoy life – as much or as little of it as remained – and why not use his power to allow him to do so? His musings had finally persuaded him to send for Bartholomew Hawkins and entrust him with his secret mission without further delay.

Jahangir looked up at a sky that every day grew heavier and darker with rain clouds. In a very few weeks the monsoon rains would begin again. He hoped they wouldn’t hamper Hawkins’s journey down the Jumna and then the Ganges to Bengal. Though the rivers would soon be in full spate enabling the boats to make swift progress, the currents would become more hazardous. It wasn’t an ideal time for such a mission but he was impatient. If Bartholomew Hawkins succeeded, he could take possession of the one thing – or rather the one person – that would make his life complete, even if the cautious Suleiman Beg might have questioned his methods of obtaining it.



Bartholomew Hawkins slapped at a mosquito that had just bitten him on his jawline. Looking at his hand he saw that it was smeared with dark red blood. Good, he’d got the bastard, though it was only a small victory against one of the armies of biting insects that were making his life such a trial. The horse he had purchased for the last stage of his journey to Gaur was old, its ribs sticking out bony as a camel’s, but even the finest animal would find it hard to make much progress in the thick ochre mud. Only the thought of the thousand mohurs was keeping him going. Since leaving Agra he’d had two prolonged bouts of fever – his sweat had soaked him, his garments and his bedding – and one of such ring-stinging liquid diarrhoea and agonising stomach cramps that he’d vowed – and meant it – to take the first ship he could find when he reached the coast and sail home to England. But at least when he’d had his last bout of fever he’d still been on a riverboat and an old white-clad, white-haired Hindu priest with kind brown eyes had looked after him. Yet when Bartholomew had tried to press a coin into his hand the man had recoiled. He’d never understand this country.

Peering ahead in the fading light, he could just make out the rear of the Gaur-bound mule train that he had attached himself to. Preoccupied with driving their laden beasts over the boggy ground, none of the merchants had shown any interest in him which was good although he had his story ready – he was a Portuguese official on his way to the trading settlement of Hooghly near the mouth of the Ganges to enquire into the prospects for increasing trade in indigo and calicoes. He looked nothing like an official – nor, come to that, a Portuguese given his curly red-gold hair and pale blue eyes – but these people didn’t know that. Or that in his saddlebags were two very fine steel daggers: one a Persian weapon with a blade so sharp it could split the hair of a horse’s tail and the other a Turkish one with a curved blade engraved – or so he’d been told by the Turkish armourer who’d sold it to him – with the words I will kill you but whether you go to Paradise or to hell is God’s will.

The emperor’s demeanour had suggested he’d far rather Sher Afghan went to hell but he’d revealed nothing about why he wanted the man dead. Bartholomew reached for his leather bottle and took a gulp of water. It was warm and fetid-tasting but he’d long ago ceased to worry about such things. All he prayed was that he wouldn’t be seized with another attack in his bowels. Restoppering the bottle his thoughts returned to Jahangir, how intent the dark eyes in that handsome fine-boned face had looked as he’d given Bartholomew his orders. Despite his fine brocades and the glittering rings on every finger, Bartholomew had detected a man perhaps not so unlike himself . . . a man who knew what he wanted and was prepared to be ruthless in pursuit of it. He had also noted the whitened scars – one on the back of Jahangir’s left hand and another running up his right brow into his hairline. The emperor knew about the art of killing too.

Suddenly Bartholomew heard men shouting to one another up ahead. Instinctively he felt for his sword in case robbers – dacoits the local people called them – were falling on the mule train. Such attacks often happened at dusk when the enfolding darkness gave cover to the robbers and the merchants were growing tired. Three nights ago at that time Bartholomew had saved a puny carpet seller. The man had stopped in drizzling rain to redistribute the load from a mule that had become lame among his other beasts. He had been struggling with a rolled carpet almost as large as himself when two bandits had trotted up out of the darkness. Jumping down from their ponies, one had kicked the carpet dealer to the ground while the other had begun gathering the reins of the mules, preparing to lead them away. Both were so preoccupied they never saw Bartholomew, galloping out of the murk, until it was too late. Drawing his Toledo steel sword he had almost severed one man’s head from his shoulders and split the other’s skull like a ripe melon. The carpet seller’s gratitude had been overwhelming and he’d tried to force a rug on him. But Bartholomew had already been regretting his actions. If he was to carry out his mission and win his reward, he must not attract attention.

But now the reason for the shouts wasn’t dacoits. The cries were of relief and joy, not fear. Ahead of him Bartholomew could see watchtowers silhouetted against the remnants of the sunset – it was Gaur. Bartholomew let go of his sword hilt and gave his sweating horse a pat. ‘Not long now, you wretched old nag.’



What was all that commotion in the courtyard at this hour? Bartholomew wondered irritably as he lay on the straw-filled mattress in the small room he’d rented in a caravanserai just inside the walls of Gaur by the main gate. He sat up and scratched vigorously then clambered to his feet and without bothering to pull on his boots went outside. Though it was barely dawn, merchants were laying out their wares on a great stone platform in the centre of the courtyard ready to begin trading: sacks of spices, bags of rice, millet and maize, rolls of dun-coloured cotton and of garish silks. Bartholomew surveyed them without interest but as he turned away he found the carpet seller he had rescued looking up at him.

‘Gaur is a fine city, sir.’

‘Very fine,’ Bartholomew said mechanically. He was about to go back to his room – he could do with an hour or two’s more sleep – but then a thought struck him. ‘Hassan Ali – that is your name, isn’t it?’

The man nodded.

‘Hassan Ali, you know Gaur well?’

‘Yes. I come here six times a year and two of my cousins are traders here.’

‘You said you wanted to repay me for my help. Be my guide. I don’t know this place and my employers in Portugal wish me to send them a full report of it.’

An hour later Bartholomew followed Hassan Ali across the square courtyard of the caravanserai and out through its high arched gateway into the streets of Gaur. At first with its narrow, refuse-strewn streets it looked a mean place but as Hassan Ali, walking with surprising speed for such a small man, led him towards the centre the streets began to broaden and the houses – some of them two storeys high – to become more handsome. Bartholomew also noted the many groups of soldiers they passed. ‘Where are they going?’ He pointed to a double row of twenty green-sashed, green-turbaned warriors marching by.

‘They were the detachment guarding the city’s gates during the night but they have now been relieved and are returning to their barracks.’

‘Where are they?’

‘Not far. I will show you.’

A few minutes later Bartholomew looked up at a tall square fortress-like building with a parade ground in front of it. Built of mud bricks, its walls rose about fifty feet. As he watched, a group of horsemen, doubtless returning after exercising their mounts, trotted through the heavy metal-spiked gate that was the barracks’ single entrance. ‘It’s a fine building.’

‘Yes. It was built by the Emperor Akbar – may his spirit rest in Paradise – after his conquest of Bengal. He also reinforced the city walls and built the fine caravanserais that we have here. He was truly a great man.’

‘I’m sure. Who commands the Moghul troops here? He must be an important man to be so favoured by the emperor.’

‘I don’t know his name. I’m sorry.’

‘It’s not important. I was merely curious to know who was entrusted with such a task. Hindustan is so huge compared with my own country. There, it is far easier for a monarch to control his lands and to know what is going on . . .’

‘It is true. Our empire is without parallel in the world.’ Hassan Ali nodded complacently. ‘Come. Let me take you to the great bazaar where much trading is done in addition to that in the caravanserais.’

They were just turning away when the harsh metallic blaring of a trumpet made them halt. Moments later twelve soldiers splendidly mounted on matching bay horses cantered out of a side street and across the parade ground towards the barracks. One of them was holding the short brass trumpet he must have just sounded to signal their arrival. They were followed by three further riders – two in domed helmets riding on either side of a tall man who was looking to neither right nor left and whose long dark hair flowed from beneath a white-plumed helmet.

Bartholomew’s pulses quickened. He glanced around for Hassan Ali and saw him conversing with a melon seller in a grimy dhoti. Bartholomew listened hard but couldn’t understand what they were saying. It must be a local language, he thought. It certainly wasn’t Persian. The melon seller seemed to have a lot to say. He had emerged from behind his mounds of cylindrical yellow-green fruits and was talking vigorously and pointing to the barracks into which the man with the plumed helmet and his escort had now disappeared.

‘Sir,’ said Hassan Ali, ‘the commander of the garrison is called Sher Afghan. That was him we just saw. The melon seller told me he is a great warrior. Two years ago the late emperor sent him to the jungles and swamps of Arakan east of here to deal with the pirates living there. It is a terrible place, infested with crocodiles, but Sher Afghan triumphed. He captured and executed five hundred pirates, throwing their bodies on to pyres of their own burning boats.’

‘Does he live in the barracks?’

‘No. His mansion is in a large garden to the north of the city, by the Swordmaker’s Gate. Now, let us go to the bazaar. You will find much to interest you there . . . last time I was here I saw a painted wooden figure of one of your Portuguese gods. It had golden wings . . .’



Bartholomew bided his time. Every day the rains still came, hot and heavy, the drops bouncing up from the paved courtyard of the caravanserai. In between the showers he put on the hooded dark brown robe he had purchased in the bazaar to make his appearance less remarkable and walked around Gaur until he had fixed in his mind every twist of every street, every alley, in the area between the barracks and Sher Afghan’s house. He also observed his intended victim’s movements which, apart from the odd day’s hunting or hawking when the weather allowed, seemed surprisingly regular. Nearly every afternoon, Sher Afghan spent several hours in the barracks. On Mondays he reviewed his troops on the parade ground, watching their displays of musketry practice, and on Wednesdays he inspected some part of the city’s defences.

During the long journey from Agra Bartholomew had pondered how best to find an opportunity to kill Sher Afghan. He smiled to think he had even contemplated trying to pick a quarrel with him as if Gaur were an English town where he and Sher Afghan might meet and brawl in a tavern. Now he had seen not just the muscular strength of the man but that a bodyguard accompanied him everywhere the idea had less to commend it. Whatever he did must be by stealth. It might be possible to find a vantage point from which to aim an arrow or hurl a dagger but the chances of even wounding him, let alone of killing him outright, were slender. Jahangir had made it absolutely clear that he wanted Sher Afghan dead.

But on a clear day when the rains seemed finally to be easing and there was a new freshness in the air, the solution came to Bartholomew. It was so obvious and simple – though not without danger to himself – that he grinned as he wondered why he hadn’t thought of it before.



Two weeks later, towards eleven o’clock in the evening – an hour before the caravanserai’s gates would be locked for the night – Bartholomew slipped out of his room, giving a parting kick to the sweat-stained straw-filled mattress on which he’d spent so many uncomfortable nights. Beneath his dark robe, his sword in its scabbard was suspended from a steel chain round his waist as were his two daggers, the Turkish blade on his right side and the Persian weapon on his left. He had cut slits in the coarse cloth of his robe to ensure he could reach for them quickly.

Bartholomew swiftly crossed the caravanserai’s courtyard and went out through its arched entrance past the sleeping gatekeeper who was supposed to keep watch for late arrivals seeking a bed for the night for themselves and stabling for their animals. Once outside he glanced swiftly around him to make sure he was alone. Then he set off through the quiet, narrow streets. He’d walked this precise route many times and knew exactly where it was taking him as he headed across the parade ground and past the barracks towards the north of the city. Reaching a small Hindu temple where tapers burned in a brass pot before the image of an elephant god, Bartholomew turned down an alley where the overhanging upper storeys of the houses were so close they almost touched. He caught the soft sound of a woman singing from one house and the crying of a baby from another. Here and there the orange light of oil lamps flickered through the carved wooden jalis covering the windows.

Suddenly Bartholomew’s foot caught something soft. It was a dog whose reproachful whimper followed him as he continued his leisurely progress. There was no need to hurry and anyway a man in a hurry always attracted more attention. The alley was broadening out, and as it curved round to the left it gave on to a large square. Bartholomew had seen it at every time of day and night. He knew how many neem trees shaded the stallholders peddling their wares in the heat of the day, how many other streets and alleys led into it and how many men would be guarding the tall house directly opposite him at the far end of the square. Pulling his hood still lower over his face, Bartholomew peered cautiously round the corner into the square. The new moon was shedding hardly any radiance but the glow from braziers burning on either side of the house’s metal-bound gates showed that – just as on other nights – four guards were on duty. It also showed that a green banner was flapping from a gilded pole above the gates – the sign, as he had discovered from Hassan Ali, that the commander was at home. All seemed very quiet. Had any sort of party or feast been in progress he would have had to postpone his plan . . .

Having seen what he wanted, Bartholomew drew back into the shadows of the alley and, turning, began to retrace his steps. After a hundred paces or so he came to a small street branching off to the left. In the daytime it was full of vegetable sellers raucously pressing their own wares on passers-by and deriding their competitors’ produce, but now it was silent and empty. Bartholomew walked along it, the leaves of rotting vegetables slippery beneath his feet and the air reeking of their decomposition, but his mind was on other things. This street curved round behind the square. In a few hundred yards it would pass close to the western wall of the fine gardens behind Sher Afghan’s house.

The wall was quite high – at least twenty feet – but there were enough foot- and handholds in the brickwork to make climbing it possible, as he knew. On the past two nights he had hauled himself over it, choosing a place where a tall clump of bamboo was growing on the other side, to drop down amongst the dense vegetation. Crouching amongst the leafy bamboos he had listened and watched. Through the swaying stems he had been able to make out a courtyard with a bubbling fountain and beyond it the dark walls of the house. Metal gates identical to those at the front led inside the house but with two important differences. They were kept open – beyond them he had glimpsed an inner courtyard – and they were also only lightly guarded. At night, a watchman – no more than a youth as far as Bartholomew could tell from his slight frame – sat on a wooden stool just inside the gates. He appeared to have no weapon – only a small drum to beat to rouse the household in case of danger.

But what danger could Sher Afghan be expecting? He was the commander of a garrison in a quiescent – albeit distant – part of a peaceful and powerful empire. The soldiers guarding the front gate were probably more for show than anything else. Once again Bartholomew found himself wondering why the emperor wanted this man dead and why – all-powerful as he was – he had chosen this way of getting rid of him. If Sher Afghan had committed some crime why didn’t Jahangir just execute him? He was emperor after all. But then that was none of his business. All that mattered were the thousand mohurs.

Reaching the wall without incident, Bartholomew glanced about him to make sure yet again that no one was around. Satisfied, he hitched up his dark robe and began to climb. This time for some reason, perhaps nerves or impatience to get the job done, he didn’t choose his handholds so well. When he was already about fifteen feet up, the corner of a brick he was grasping in his right hand crumbled and he nearly fell backwards to the ground. Digging his toes hard into crevices between the bricks and hanging on with his left hand – he could feel blood oozing from beneath his nails – he managed to steady himself. Stretching his right arm higher he probed the rough surfaces until he found a place that felt secure. With one more big heave he was on top of the wall.

Brushing the sweat from his face he carefully lowered himself down the other side, letting go when he was still ten feet above the ground to drop into the space he had found among the bamboos. Squatting down, heart pounding, he listened. No sounds, nothing. That was good. It must be after midnight now but it was still too early to make his move. He shifted a little to make himself more comfortable. He felt some small creature – a mouse or a gecko – run over his foot and heard the familiar whine of mosquitoes. Frowning slightly, he focused his mind on the task ahead.

It was about one in the morning when Bartholomew began moving slowly towards the house, keeping under cover of the bamboos and then of the spreading branches of a thickly leaved mango tree. In the moonlight, he could see the watchman, young head slumped on his chest and clearly fast asleep on his stool. Beyond him the inner courtyard, lit only by small torches burning in brackets on the wall, was quiet and still. Bartholomew darted across the garden past the still playing fountain to the wall of the house, choosing a place a little to the left of the gates that was overshadowed by a projecting balcony. Flattening his back against the wall he closed his eyes for a moment as he steadied his breathing.

Then he began edging towards the gates. Reaching them he paused and peered inside. He was so close to the watchman that he could hear his light snores. But there was no other sound. Tensing his muscles, he sprang forward through the doors, grabbed the youth from behind with both arms and hauled him out into the garden, right hand clamped firmly over his mouth. ‘One sound out of you and you’re dead,’ Barthlomew whispered in Persian. ‘Do you understand me?’ The youth’s eyes were wide with fright as he nodded. ‘Now take me to where your master Sher Afghan is sleeping.’

The youth nodded again. Gripping the nape of the young watchman’s neck with his left hand so firmly that his nails dug into the flesh, and with his right drawing his curved-bladed Turkish dagger from its oxhide scabbard, Bartholomew followed him across the inner courtyard, through a doorway in the corner and up a flight of narrow stone stairs to a long corridor. He could feel the youth trembling like a frightened puppy beneath his grip.

‘Here, sir. This is the room.’ The boy halted outside a chamber with highly polished doors of some dark wood inlaid with brass tigers. Bartholomew thought he could smell some spicy perfume – frankincense perhaps – and tightened his hold on the youth, who looked round, brown eyes terrified. Without warning he opened his mouth to cry out an alarm.

Bartholomew didn’t hesitate. In two rapid movements he jerked back the boy’s head with his left hand and with his right raised his bright-bladed Turkish dagger and drew it across the smooth-skinned throat. As the youth’s last breaths bubbled through the gaping wound he laid the limp body down. In other circumstances he might have spared him, but not here where he could so easily lose his own life if he made a mistake. Instinctively he wiped the bloody dagger on his robes. All his thoughts were on what he would find on the other side of those dark doors with their gleaming tigers. He’d heard it said that ‘sher’ meant ‘tiger’ – if so he was in the right place and Sher Afghan was just a few feet away.

Still holding his dagger in his right hand, with his left Bartholomew carefully raised the ornate metal latch – again fashioned like a tiger – on the right-hand door and gave a gentle exploratory push. To his relief the door opened smoothly and quietly. When it was about six inches ajar he stopped. A shaft of pale golden light told him the room he was about to enter was not in darkness as he had hoped. Perhaps Sher Afghan had already seen the door swing open and was even now drawing his sword . . .

Bartholomew hesitated no longer but pushed the door wide and stepped inside. The large room was hung with red silk embroidered with gold thread. Soft thick carpets were beneath his feet and a spiral of smoke was rising from some crystals glowing in an enamelled incense burner. Wicks were burning in oil-filled bronze diyas. But Bartholomew’s gaze was on none of these things. He was staring through the almost transparent pale pink muslin curtains drawn across the room to divide it in two. Through the fabric he could see a large low bed and upon it two intertwined naked bodies, a man and a woman. The man at least was so absorbed in his lovemaking that Bartholomew could have probably kicked the door open without his noticing. The woman was on her back, slender legs hooked around the man’s muscular hips as he thrust and her view of the door obstructed by her lover’s body.

Providence could not have given him a better opportunity, Bartholomew thought as he came nearer. Carefully, he slipped through the muslin curtains and treading softly approached the bed. He was now so close he could see the sweaty sheen on the man’s body and smell the salty tang of it but both he and the woman, whose head was turned aside, her eyes closed, were still oblivious of his presence. Close to climax, with each thrust Sher Afghan was joyously throwing back his head. As he did so, Bartholomew leapt forward, grabbed him by his thick black hair, yanked his head back even further and neatly severed his jugular. Bartholomew was a skilled killer. Just like the gatekeeper, Sher Afghan made not a sound as his hot red blood pumped from the gaping wound.

Bartholomew grabbed hold of the heavy body, stared for a moment into the still open eyes to reassure himself that it was indeed Sher Afghan, then pushed it to the floor and turned his attention to the woman who had now opened her eyes and was sitting up, knees drawn up defensively. Her lover’s blood was running down between her opulent breasts and her dark eyes were fixed on his face as if trying to predict what he would do next. ‘Don’t make a noise and I won’t hurt you,’ he said. Slowly, her gaze never leaving his face, she pulled up a sheet over her but said nothing.

He was relieved – he didn’t want to kill a woman any more than he had wanted to kill the young watchman – but at the same time he was surprised. He’d have expected someone in her situation to scream hysterically or shout abuse but she didn’t look as devastated as she might have that the man who just moments earlier had been passionately and vigorously making love to her was lying in a pool of congealing blood on the floor. Instead her expression was almost one of curiosity. He realised she was taking in every detail from his dark, grubby robe and blood-smeared hands to the stray curls of red-gold hair slipping from beneath the length of dun-coloured cloth he’d wound round his head.

He turned to go. He’d stayed too long already. Backing away just in case she had a weapon concealed somewhere, he reached the doors, expecting any moment to hear her scream out for the guards. But he was through the door, down the corridor and hurling himself down the stone steps into the silent and now empty courtyard before, at last, he heard a woman’s shrill cry of ‘Murder!’ As he ran through the dark gardens he heard a commotion break out behind him – men’s voices, the sound of running feet – but he was nearly at the wall now. Forcing his way through the tough bamboos, not caring how he scraped or scratched himself, he flung himself at the wall and scaled it, this time without difficulty.

Back in the street he paused for a moment. Taking his Turkish dagger, still stained with Sher Afghan’s gore, he kissed it lightly. The thousand mohurs were his.